Defining the problem 

Background:
PCR duplicates are copies of unique cDNAs that are made during the PCR amplification step of library prep. 
Prior to amplifiication, sections of nucleic acids are marked with a Unique Molecular Identifier (UMI).
These are random strings of nucleotides tacked on to the insert along with the adapters/indexes/etc.
Not every read amplifies the same amount due to amplification bias during PCR. 
PCR duplicates can be problematic when trying to quantify transcript abundance. 
De-duplication removes PCR duplicates to result in a more accurate representation of the nucleic acid ratios present in the library pre-amplification.
This is a useful and necessary step for differential abundance analysis. 

When we are writing our algorithm, we will need to take into account:
1. Soft clipping (leftmost position starts where soft clipped portion ends and mapped seq begins)
2. Reverse complements (adjusting leftmost position based on whether it is a reverse complement)
3. Chromosomal coordinates (chromosome, position)
4. Unique Molecular Identifiers (96 known unique identifier sequences)

Task:
Write an algorithm that takes a uniquely mapped SAM file as input, filters out PCR duplicates, and outputs a SAM file with no duplicate sequences present.

Pseudocode: 

Unify chromosomal coordinates
I want to filter out duplicates in a chromosomal coordinate-based way to take advantage of reference-based deduplication.
In order to do this, I need to "correct" position information for soft clipping, taking into account reverse complements.
Align everything up according to the 5' position. 

read file
    skip startswith @
    
if not a reverse complement: 
    check CIGAR string. 
    soft clipped at start?
        adjust - subtract number of soft clipped from POS to get 5' position.

if reverse complement:
    reverse complement UMI in QNAME
    check CIGAR string
    soft clipped at end?
        any indels or skips?
            adjust pos - correct soft clip from POS to get 5' position. 

3 - sort by chromosomal coordinates 
Samtools sort (by chromosomal coordinates)?
If I can't use samtools for this, then sort by chromosome + position using python.


4 - UMI filtering and write to output file

make sure file is sorted by position (chromosome + position)
    keep a list of all POS seen; if POS is repeated, throw exception. 

make UMI set from text file. 
for line in file, add to set.


for line in sam file: 
    skip startswith @
    readline to list
    if position listed in line is position in mem:
        if UMI not in umidict AND/OR UMI in temp memory:
            skip line
        else: 
            write UMI to temp memory
            write whole line to sam out file
    else:
        clear UMI
        update position in mem


High-level functions

def prefilter(samfile: string):
'''Takes a sam file, filters out all unmapped reads and secondary alignments, and outputs a processed sam file.'''
return 
Input: SAM file with secondary aligns (flag & 256) and unmapped sequences (flag & 4).
Output: SAM file with only mapped primary alignments

def coordinater(samfile: string):
'''Takes a sam file, uses CIGAR string and strandedness information from FLAG to "correct" position info'''
return
Input: SAM file with left-most mapping position as POS
Output: SAM file with "corrected" mapping position appended to end of QNAME 

def rev_comp(nucleotides: string) -> string: 
'''Takes a nucleotide string and returns the reverse compliment of that nucleotide string'''
return reversecompliment
Input: ACTG
Output: CAGT

def umi_dict(STL96.txt: string) -> set:
'''Takes a text file with 96 UMI strings and makes a set of known UMIs'''
return set
Input: filename of UMI list
Output: set object containing UMIs

def umi_filter(samfile: string):
'''Takes a sam file, compares UMI and position, and outputs first UMI observed for each position.'''
return 
Input: SAM file with duplicate UMIs and unified positions
Output: SAM file with unique UMIs per position

